---
layout: post
title: "Lingyue Kong, Launches Site"
date: 2021-02-06
---



    “The simple graph has brought more information to the data analyst’s mind than any other device.” — John Tukey

This chapter will teach you how to visualise your data using ggplot2. R has several systems for making graphs, but ggplot2 is one of the most elegant and most versatile. ggplot2 implements the grammar of graphics, a coherent system for describing and building graphs. With ggplot2, you can do more faster by learning one system and applying it in many places.

If you’d like to learn more about the theoretical underpinnings of ggplot2 before you start, I’d recommend reading “The Layered Grammar of Graphics”, http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/layered-grammar.pdf.
3.1.1 Prerequisites

This chapter focusses on ggplot2, one of the core members of the tidyverse. To access the datasets, help pages, and functions that we will use in this chapter, load the tidyverse by running this code:
library(tidyverse)
#> ── Attaching packages ─────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse 1.3.0 ──
#> ✔ ggplot2 3.3.2     ✔ purrr   0.3.4
#> ✔ tibble  3.0.3     ✔ dplyr   1.0.2
#> ✔ tidyr   1.1.2     ✔ stringr 1.4.0
#> ✔ readr   1.4.0     ✔ forcats 0.5.0
#> ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
#> ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
#> ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()
That one line of code loads the core tidyverse; packages which you will use in almost every data analysis. It also tells you which functions from the tidyverse conflict with functions in base R (or from other packages you might have loaded).

If you run this code and get the error message “there is no package called ‘tidyverse’”, you’ll need to first install it, then run library() once again.
install.packages("tidyverse")
library(tidyverse)

You only need to install a package once, but you need to reload it every time you start a new session.

If we need to be explicit about where a function (or dataset) comes from, we’ll use the special form package::function(). For example, ggplot2::ggplot() tells you explicitly that we’re using the ggplot() function from the ggplot2 package.

Visualisation is an important tool for insight generation, but it is rare that you get the data in exactly the right form you need. Often you’ll need to create some new variables or summaries, or maybe you just want to rename the variables or reorder the observations in order to make the data a little easier to work with. You’ll learn how to do all that (and more!) in this chapter, which will teach you how to transform your data using the dplyr package and a new dataset on flights departing New York City in 2013.
