---
layout: post
title: "Week 4"
date: 2021-02-10
---

Using likelihoods to find estimates of parameters is conceptually intuitive—select the estimate for your parameter where your data is most likely. Often MLEs make a lot of intuitive sense in the context of a problem as well; for example, here the MLE for the probability of a boy is the observed proportion of boys in the data. It may seem like a lot of work for such an obvious result, but MLEs have some nice, useful theoretical properties, and we’ll see that many more complex models can be fit using the principle of maximum likelihood.

In summary, we constructed a likelihood that reflected features of our Sex Unconditional Model, then we approximated the parameter value for which our data is most likely using a graph or software, or we determined our optimal parameter value exactly using calculus. You may not be familiar with calculus, yet the concept is clear from the graphs: just find the value of pB
where the likelihood or log likelihood is a maximum. Our “best” estimate for pB

, the MLE, is where our data is most likely to be observed.

Work to understand the idea of a likelihood. Likelihoods are the foundation upon which estimates are obtained and models compared for most of this course. Do not be overly concerned with calculus and computation at this point.

Correlated data is encountered in nearly every field. In education, student scores from a particular teacher are typically more similar than scores of other students who have had a different teacher. During a study measuring depression indices weekly over the course of a month, we usually find that four measures for the same patient tend to be more similar than depression indices from other patients. In political polling, opinions from members of the same household are usually more similar than opinions of members from other randomly selected households. The structure of these data sets suggest inherent patterns of similarities or correlation among outcomes. This kind of correlation specifically concerns correlation of observations within the same teacher or patient or household and is referred to as intraclass correlation.

Correlated data often takes on a multilevel structure. That is, population elements are grouped into aggregates, and we often have information on both the individual elements and the aggregated groups. For instance, students are grouped by teacher, weekly depression measures are grouped by patient, and survey respondents are grouped by household. In these cases, we refer to levels of measurement and observational units at each level. For example, students might represent level-one observational units, while teachers represent level-two observational units, where level one is the most basic level of observation, and level-one observations are aggregated to form level-two observations. Then, if we are modeling a response such as test score, we may want to examine the effects of student characteristics such as sex and ethnicity, and teacher characteristics such as years of experience. Student characteristics would be considered level-one covariates, while teacher characteristics would be level-two covariates.
