---
layout: post
title: "Week 1"
date: 2021-02-05
---

Ecologists count species, criminologists count arrests, and cancer specialists count cases. Political scientists seek to explain who is a Democrat, pre-med students are curious about who gets into medical school, and sociologists study which people get tattoos. In the first case, ecologists, criminologists and cancer specialists are concerned about outcomes which are counts. The political scientists’, pre-med students’ and sociologists’ interest centers on binary responses: Democrat or not, accepted or not, and tattooed or not. We can model these non-Gaussian (non-normal) responses in a more natural way by fitting generalized linear models (GLMs) as opposed to using linear least squares regression (LLSR) models.

When models are fit to data using linear least squares regression (LLSR), inferences are possible using traditional statistical theory under certain conditions: if we can assume that there is a linear relationship between the response (Y) and an explanatory variable (X), the observations are independent of one another, the responses are approximately normal for each level of the X, and the variation in the responses is the same for each level of X. If we intend to make inferences using GLMs, necessary assumptions are different. First, we will not be constrained by the normality assumption. When conditions are met, GLMs can accommodate non-normal responses such as the counts and binary data in our preceding examples. While the observations must still be independent of one another, the variance in Y at each level of X need not be equal nor does the assumption of linearity between Y and X need to be plausible.

However, GLMs cannot be used for models in the following circumstances: medical researchers collect data on patients in clinical trials weekly for 6 months; rat dams are injected with teratogenic substances and their offspring are monitored for defects; and, musicians’ performance anxiety is recorded for several performances. Each of these examples involves correlated data: the same patient’s outcomes are more likely to be similar from week-to-week than outcomes from different patients; litter mates are more likely to suffer defects at similar rates in contrast to unrelated rat pups; and, a musician’s anxiety is more similar from performance to performance than it is with other musicians. Each of these examples violate the independence assumption of simpler linear models for LLSR or GLM inference.

The Generalized Linear Models in the book’s title extends least squares methods you may have seen in linear regression to handle responses that are non-normal. The Multilevel Models in the book’s title will allow us to create models for situations where the observations are not independent of one another. Overall, these approaches will permit us to get much more out of data and may be more faithful to the actual data structure than models based on ordinary least squares. These models will allow you to expand beyond multiple linear regression.

In order to understand the motivation for handling violations of assumptions, it is helpful to be able to recognize the model assumptions for inference with LLSR in the context of different studies. While linearity is sufficient for fitting an LLSR model, in order to make inferences and predictions the observations must also be independent, the responses should be approximately normal at each level of the predictors, and the standard deviation of the responses at each level of the predictors should be approximately equal. After examining circumstances where inference with LLSR is appropriate, we will look for violations of these assumptions in other sets of circumstances. These are settings where we may be able to use the methods of this text. We’ve kept the examples in the exposition simple to fix ideas. There are exercises which describe more realistic and complex studies.
