---
layout: post
title: "Week 5"
date: 2021-02-14
---

Linear regression assumptions:

1.Errors are independent (observations are independent)
2.Errors are identically distributed and the expected value of the errors is zero, E[ϵi]=0
3.Constant variance (homoscedasticity), var[ϵi]=σ2. A straight-line relationship exists between the errors ϵi and responses y.

Linear mixed models assume that:

    There is a continuous response variable.
    We have modelled the dependency structure correctly (i.e. made correct choices about our random variables).
    Our units/subjects are independent, even through observations within each subject are taken not to to be.
    Both the random effects and within-unit residual errors follow normal distributions.
    The random effects errors and within-unit residual errors have constant variance .

While it is possible to some extent to check these assumptions through various diagnostics, a natural concern is that if one or more assumptions do not hold, our inferences may be invalid. Fortunately it turns out that linear mixed models are robust to violations of some of their assumptions.

y is vector of outcomes for subject i
X and Z are model matrices for the fixed and random effects, respectively,
the vector β describes the effect of covariates on the mean/expectation of the outcome, 
b is the random effects for the units (assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero),
ϵ is the residual errors, normally distributed with a given variance and the errors within units are mutually independent. In this course we won't deal with more complicated situations than a simple error vector that is distributed N(0,σ2) . 

Note that:
Fixed effects are the things you care about and want to estimate. You likely chose the factor levels for a specific reason or measured the variable because you are interested in the relationship it has to your response variable. Random effects can be variables that were opportunistically measured whose variation needs to be accounted for but that you are not necessarily interested in (e.g. spatial block in a large experiment). The levels of the random effect are likely a random subset of all possible levels (although as a rule of thumb, there should usually be at least 5). However, if the experimental design includes nesting or non-independence of any kind, this needs to be accounted for to avoid pseudoreplication.

More examples of identifying fixed vs random effects

Consider the following two examples from Roback & Legler (2021), section 7.10. Identify which variable is the response and which are the fixed effects and the random effects.

    Cockroaches! For a study of cockroach infestation, traps were set up in the kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom in a random sample of 100 New York City apartments. The goal is to estimate cockroach infestation levels given tenant income and age of the building.

Variables: room type, tenant income,apartment, building age, building, count of cockroaches

    Radon in Minnesota. Radon is a carcinogen – a naturally occurring radioactive gas whose decay products are also radioactive – known to cause lung cancer in high concentrations. The EPA sampled more than 80,000 homes across the U.S. Each house came from a randomly selected county and measurements were made on each level of each home. Uranium measurements at the county level were included to improve the radon estimates.

Variables: radon measurement, home, level of home, uranium, county
